Guidelines for Unified Morph Segmentation in Multiple Languages
1 Intro

The aim of the project is to investigate the internal structure of words in individual languages and to
compare this structure across languages. 
Within the project, we adopt the traditional distinction between morpheme and morph. A morpheme is understood as the smallest linguistic unit that links form and meaning. A morpheme is instantiated in actual words by a morph. Some morphs may occur independently as mono-morphemic words, while others appear only in combination with other morphs and thus constitute parts of multi-morphemic words. If a single morpheme has multiple formally distinct realizations, this is referred to as allomorphy. In the project, we proceed bottom-up, that is, by identifying morphs in the attested linguistic material.
The assignment of morphs to morphemes as more abstract units will be addressed in the next phase of the project; essentially, it will involve a process analogous to lemmatization, whereby an inflected word form is linked to its dictionary form.

2 Basic principles of morph segmentation

We will work with authentic linguistic material. The task will be to segment word forms extracted from text corpora into morphs.
The basic principles for the planned morph segmentation are as follows:

• Maximum segmentation:
The goal is to find all possible morphs in a segmented word form, i.e., to completely decompose
only the inflectional formant (divide the inflected form into the base stem), or to find only the last added derivational affix.

• Delimitation of morphs in corpus-attested forms:
Morphs will be identified in word forms as they appear in text corpora. The project does not aim
at modeling word-formation processes, where a motivating word is sought for a more complex
word.

• Morph as a re-occurring unit:
Morphs are expected to re-occur in multiple different word forms. Comparing forms in these
sets—ideally consisting of at least three members—is the basic principle for identifying morphs.e

• Cranberry morphs vs. no segmentation
If, based on analogy, it is possible to distinguish only some morphs in a word, the remaining
substring can also be considered a morph (cranberry morph), if it is synchronically recognizable.

• Formal and semantic criteria:
Although a morph is considered a formal unit, we also use semantic criteria to delimit it. It
should be a string that can be associated with some (lexical, derivational, inflectional) meaning.

• Free and bound morphs:

3 Simple examples
While in English we encounter mono-morphemic words (simplexes) across all parts of speech, in Ger-
In this segmentation project, we do not work with the concept of zero morphs, i.e., morphs with
a graphically unrealized form. some morphological approaches posit zero morphs in positions where
related forms show an overt exponent.
Proper names may also appear in the data. In the project, we want to treat them similarly to common
names: their internal structure is analyzed if it is synchronously apparent.

3.1 Simplexes are not segmented

3.2 Complex words containing a root and inflectional morphs

Because all letters in the data samples for all languages are normalized to lowercase, the graphic distinction of proper
names by capitalization, used in some languages, is lost. This is not an error.

4 More challenging examples

4.1 Allomorphy
Some letters can be considered both the final element of one morph and the initial letter of the
following morph (cf. e in writer). However, since in this step we only divide attested word forms into
substrings, the disputed letter cannot be placed in both morphs at the same time. In such cases, we assign
the disputed letter to the second morph, which may increase the allomorphy of the first morph (cf. the
Contracted forms are also merely divided into segments belonging to originally separate words, but
the full form of these words is not reconstructed.
Abbreviations are also segmented if the internal structure is transparent.
Internal modification (vowel and consonant alternations) that might happen inside the roots are not a
reason for root segmentation, even though some concepts proceed in this way (discontinuous stems).
Here, these roots are understood as allomorphs.

4.2 Segmentation of pronominal words
Pronouns and other pronominal expressions should be segmented only to the extent that the identified
morphs are synchronically attested across multiple forms in the language.
Synchronically non-transparent pronominal (personal, possessive, demonstrative or interrogative)
substrings are not expected to be delimited at this stage of the project, even though they recur across
forms.

4.3 Segmentation of numeral expressions
Similarly, numerals are analyzed internally only when their structure is synchronically transparent.

4.4 Segmentation of non-inflected word classes
Words that function as both inflected and uninflected parts of speech (e.g., nouns and prepositions)
are segmented identically in both functions.

4.5 Segmentation of loanwords
In the data used for segmentation, which are randomly sampled from frequency lists extracted from the
InterCorp corpora, loanwords are not distinguished from native (inherited) words. In the segmentation
process, we aim to treat loanwords as much like native words as possible (identifying inflectional end-
ings, comparing structure across sets sharing the same substring, etc.), while still respecting the structure
of the current language. We do not impose identical structural analyses of corresponding words across
different languages.

End of guidelines.
